Add python tooling and standards ADR (#33)
MinBZK/ai-validation: docs/ADRs/0005-python-tooling.md

---
    title: 0005 Python coding standard and tools
    adr:
        author: Berry den Hartog
        created: 28-Feb-2024
        status:  accepted
---

## Context

In modern software development, maintaining code quality is crucial for readability, maintainability, and collaboration.
Python, being a dynamically typed language, requires robust tooling to ensure code consistency and type safety. Manual
enforcement of coding standards is time-consuming and error-prone. Hence, adopting automated tooling to streamline this
process is imperative.

## Decision

We will use these standards and tools for our own projects:

- [Google style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html)
- [Ruff](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff)

>     - [Rules](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/): [I, SIM, B, UP, F, E]

Reviewer: ❤️ (didn't know `SIM`, nice!)

Author: I read the site, these are the most commonly used (without being to intens)

---
    title: 0005 Python coding standard and tools
    adr:
        author: Berry den Hartog
        created: 28-Feb-2024
        status:  accepted
---

## Context

In modern software development, maintaining code quality is crucial for readability, maintainability, and collaboration.
Python, being a dynamically typed language, requires robust tooling to ensure code consistency and type safety. Manual
enforcement of coding standards is time-consuming and error-prone. Hence, adopting automated tooling to streamline this
process is imperative.

## Decision

We will use these standards and tools for our own projects:

> - [google style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html)

Reviewer 2: this is a long read, are we expected to read and follow it, or is this a guideline enforced by tooling mentioned below?

Reviewer 3: I think it is worth it to read it though

Author: Some of the rules are indeed enforced by the tooling. but not all can be enforced by tooling. 

I would propose that the style guide is more a guide then a hard rule. It helps you have discussions during reviews about the code and helps you guide when writing code. i do not except anyone to know it by heart.

Reviewer 2: Ok!

- [Black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/): A code formatter that enforces a consistent code style throughout the
project.

> - [Pyright](https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/#/): A static type checker for Python, ensuring type safety and reducing

Reviewer: Why pyright over mypi?

Author: is veel sneller

Reviewer: pylint is not a static type checking tool though, is it?

Author: Not as far is a know. it is a linting tool like flake8

Reviewer 3: ah sorry that is my misunderstanding then :s

potential runtime errors.
- [flake8](https://flake8.pycqa.org/en/latest/): A linting tool that checks for PEP 8 compliance and detects code smells.

> - [isort](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/): an import sorting tool

Reviewer: I'd like to rather specify the Ruff rules (https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/) that we'd like to apply (instead of Black/flake8/isort):

F -> flake8
I -> Isort
Q -> quotes
UP -> python upgrade

Reviewer: btw, the main reason to use Ruff over other tools is that it is incredibly fast (see https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/) and you can even run most of this on safe

- [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/): A framework for managing and maintaining multi-language pre-commit hooks.

Working with external projects these coding standards will not always be possible. but we will try to integrate them as
much as possible.

## Consequences

**Improved Code Quality**: Adoption of these tools will lead to improved code quality, consistency, and maintainability
across the project.

**Enhanced Developer Productivity**: Automated code formatting and static type checking will reduce manual effort and free
developers to focus more on coding logic rather than formatting and type-related issues.

> R**educed Bug Incidence**: Static typing and linting will catch potential bugs and issues early in the development process,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Reduced Bug Incidence**: Static typing and linting will catch potential bugs and issues early in the development process,
```
